---
title: "Handling long documents for sequence classification by using transformers - RoBERT (Recurrence over BERT)"
layout: post
---
### Paper Implemenations - RoBERT Implementation

BERT [1] is a transformer-based language model used in several natural language processing tasks. Using contextual level text representations enables BERT to benefit semantic information in the documents while sparse models such as ngram approaches theoretically ignore relations between words. But BERT is not convenient with the cases of limited time and memory if finetuning approach is preferred. Besides resource restrictions, another important constraint of BERT is 512 token input size limit. In such cases, input sentences need to be truncated in the tokenization process. Theoretically truncation causes loss of later information in the long documents. To achieve token limit for some tasks such as sequence classification and next sentence prediction input embeddings representation can be obtained by dividing input tokens into segments.

In Pappagari et. al. paper [2], it is suggested that combined segments of the documents can be feed into an LSTM or a small transformer architecture. These models are called as RoBERT and ToBERT respectively. By using this methodology all information can be used for the long documents without losing any later information in the text. As stated in the paper, authors approach is as follows:

First, the document to be classified should be divided into chunks. For this purpouse, authors use a kind of sliding window approach to divide texts into chunks. That means the chunks are overlapped with the previous and the next chunks. Thus the overlap amount and the window size are hyper parameters of the RoBERT model. The below code divides any tokenized text into chunks, then stacks the segment-level representations into an embedding tensor. Note that chunking operations is parameterized with the given chunk size and the overlap size.

````
def chunker(tokenized_text, chunk_size, overlap_size):
    ''' Chunker divides into chunks any tokenized texts '''

    if tokenized_text.input_ids.shape[1] > chunk_size:
        func = lambda x: (x[0], x[1][0,:].unfold(0,chunk_size, chunk_size - overlap_size))
        return dict(map(func, dict(tokenized_text).items()))
    else:
        return(tokenized_text)
}
````

````
def stacked_tokenized_texts(tokenized_text, model, device, chunk_size, overlap_size, batch_size):
  '''
  This function takes any single tokenized text and divides into chunks.
  Then embeds these chunks by using given tranformer model.
  Then concats all embeddings in order.
  '''

  # divide into chunks
  tokenized_chunks = chunker(tokenized_text, chunk_size, overlap_size)

  # convert into Dataset
  dataset = CustomDataset(tokenized_chunks)

  # create dataloader object
  loader = DataLoader(dataset, batch_size=batch_size, shuffle=False)

  embeddings = list()
  for batch in loader:
    with torch.no_grad():
      # send tensors to device
      input_ids = batch['input_ids'].to(device)
      attention_mask = batch['attention_mask'].to(device)

      # take all outputs including hidden states
      outputs = model(input_ids, attention_mask=attention_mask)

      # take only last hidden state
      last_hidden_state_outputs = outputs.hidden_states[-1]

      # take [CLS] token output
      embedding = last_hidden_state_outputs[:,0,:]

      # concat all embeddings
      embeddings.append(embedding)

      torch.cuda.empty_cache()

  return torch.cat(embeddings, axis=0)
````

````
model_name_or_directory = 'bert-base-uncased'
model = BertForSequenceClassification.from_pretrained(model_name_or_directory, output_hidden_states=True)
tokenizer = BertTokenizer.from_pretrained(model_name_or_directory)

tokenized_text = tokenizer(text, return_tensors='pt')
embeddings = stacked_tokenized_texts(tokenized_text,  model, device, chunk_size, overlap_size, batch_size)
````

In the classification stage, for RoBERT, stacked segment-level document representations are fed into 100-dimensional LSTM layer followed by two 30-dimensional fully connected layers with ReLU and Softmax activations. By simply replacing LSTM layer with two layers of transformer building blocks, RoBERT can be transformed in ToBERT architecture. The RoBERT architecture code is given below.

While authors compare performances between 3 different datasets, I only use 20newsgroup [3] dataset to validate my implementation. Then compared the model with TfIdf Logistic Regression baseline by using the same data split. Although the architecture stated in the paper is including 3 layers (one LSTM and two FC layers), in my case, only a single LSTM layer converged faster. Considering one epoch takes about 1 minute, at the end of 100 epochs I get 50% test accuracy by using a single LSTM layer with 20 hidden state. That means for long documents still truncation is applied but this time ~20 times of more text information is taken into account.


````
# Create an LSTM model as the same as stated in the paper
class RoBERT(nn.Module):
    def __init__(self, num_classes, input_size, hidden_size, num_layers):
        super(RoBERT, self).__init__()
        self.num_classes = num_classes
        self.num_layers = num_layers
        self.input_size = input_size
        self.hidden_size = hidden_size

        self.lstm = nn.LSTM(input_size=input_size, hidden_size=hidden_size,
                          num_layers=num_layers, batch_first=True)
        
        self.fc_1 =  nn.Linear(hidden_size, 30)

        self.fc_2 = nn.Linear(30, num_classes)

        self.fc_3 = nn.Linear(hidden_size, num_classes)

        self.softmax = nn.Softmax()

        self.relu = nn.ReLU()
    
    def forward(self,x):
        total_length = x.size(1)
        seq_lengths = torch.LongTensor(list(map(len, x)))

        packed_input = pack_padded_sequence(x, lengths=seq_lengths,
                                    batch_first=True)

        packed_output, _ = self.lstm(packed_input)
        
        out, _ = pad_packed_sequence(packed_output, batch_first=True,
                                total_length=total_length)

        out = self.fc_1(out) 
        out = self.relu(out) 
        
        out = self.fc_2(out)
        out = self.relu(out) 

        out = self.fc_3(out)
        out = self.relu(out) 

        out = self.softmax(out)

        return out[:,-1,:]
````

In the paper, authors report that RoBERT achieves 60.75% test accuracy without finetuning and 84.71% with finetuning. By using segment-level predictions with finetuned BERT, they achieve most frequently 84.78% and 84.51% test accuracy on average. Whether finetuning BERT is applied by using truncation or not is not clear in the paper. There are two options to finetune BERT: the first one is to use each text chunk as different documents with the same label, the second is just truncate the text. I suppose that authors used the first one because they use segment-level predictions to calculate average and the most frequent labels later in the paper.

In my experiments, Logistic Regression model by using TfIdf and BERT embeddings results in 65.5% and 72.59% test accuracy respectively. By using my RoBERT implementation (one layer LSTM) gives only 50%. But note that, since these configurations are not stated in the paper, the train-test split and hyper parameters are determined independently. The hyper-parameters I selected are as listed:

-   input size      :   768
-   hidden size     :   20
-   number epochs   :   100
-   learning rate   :   0.001
-   batch size      :   32

In conlusion, RoBERT (Recurrence over BERT) is useful to take later information in the long documents into account in theory. But it requires additional training time because of the recurrence model (LSTM). I could not achieve the baselines in my experiments without finetuning. Authors show that with finetuning embeddings the performance increases significantly. So that, finetuned segment-level representations will be my next experiment to compare with these results.

### References
- [1]	Devlin, Jacob, et al. "Bert: Pre-training of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding." In Proceedings of the 2019 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, Volume 1 (Long and Short Papers) (2019), pp. 4171–4186.
- [2] Pappagari, Raghavendra, et al. "Hierarchical transformers for long document classification." 2019 IEEE Automatic Speech Recognition and Understanding Workshop (ASRU). IEEE, 2019.
- [3] https://scikit-learn.org/0.19/datasets/twenty_newsgroups.html
